Civil Procedure Code (Amendment)  
Act No 14 of 1993  
 
 AN ACT TO AMEND THE CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE   
 BE it enacted by the Parliament of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka as follows : 
 
Gazette Nos,  
772-1-1993  
Short title and date 
of operation.  1. This Act may be cited as the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment Act, No. 14 of 1993 
and shall come into operation on such date as the Minister may appoint by Order published 
in the Gazette.  
Amendment of section 
333 of Chapter 101.  2. Section 338 of the Civil Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the "principal 
enactment") is hereby amended by the repeal of paragraph (b) thereof, and the 
substitution therefor of the following paragraph:  
 ' (b) " legal representative" means an ex ecutor or administrator or in the 
case of an estate below the value of five hundred thousand rupees, the next 
of kin who have adiated the inheritance :  
 Provided however, that in the event of any dispute arising as to who is the 
legal representative the provisions of section 397 shall, mutatis mutandis, 
apply.'.  
 
Amendment of section 394 
of the principal enactment,  3. Section 394 of the principal enac tment is hereby amended by the repeal of the 
definition of " legal representative '' in subsection (2) thereof, and the substitution 
therefor of the following definition: '  
"legal  representative" means an executor or administrator, or in the case of an estate below the value of f ive 
hundred thousand rupees, the next of kin who have adiated the inheritance.'.  
Replacement of 
Chapter XXXVIII of 
the principal 
enactment.  4. Chapter XXXVIII of the Civil Procedure Code is hereby repealed and the following 
Chapter is substituted therefor :  
Deposit of 
will of 
deceased  516. When any person shall die leaving a will in Sri Lanka, the person in 
whose keeping or custody it shall h ave been deposited, or who shall find 
such will - after the testator's death, shall produce the same to the District 
Court of the district in which such depository or finder resides, or in the 
District Court of the district in which the testator shall have died, within 
three months after the finding of the will, and he shall also make oath or 
affirmation, or produce an affidavit in Form No. 81 in the First Schedule 
verifying the time and place of death, and stating (if such is the fact) that 
the testator has  left property within the jurisdiction of that or any other, and 
in that event what court, and the nature and value of such property ; or, if 
such is the fact, that such testator has left no property in Sri Lanka - The 
will so produced shall be numbered and  initialed by the Probate Officer 
and deposited and kept in the record room of the District Court -  
Application for 
probate or 
administration.** 517.  
 (1) When any person shall die leaving a will under or by 
virtue of which any property in Sri Lanka is in any way 
affected, any person appointed executor therein may apply to the District Court of the district within which he resides, 
or within which the te stator resided at the time of his death, 
or within which any land belonging to the testator's estate is 
situate, within the time limit and in the manner specified in 
section 524, to have the will proved and to have probate 
thereof granted to him ; any pers on interested, either by 
virtue of the will or otherwise, in having the property of the 
testator administered, may also apply to such court to have 
the will proved and to obtain grant to himself of 
administration of the estate with copy of the will annexed .  
 (2) If any person who would be entitled to administration is 
absent from Sri Lanka s grant of letters of administration 
with or without the will annexed, as the. case may require, 
may be made to the duly constituted attorney of such 
person.  
 
Probate or 
administration 
compulsory 
when there is 
a will.  518. In every case where a will is deposited in court after the coming into 
operation of this Chapter, and no application has been made by any person 
to have the will proved and probate granted in  respect thereof, the court 
shall, in accordance with the procedure set out in respect of the grant of 
probate or letters of administration on application made thereto, proceed 
to granprobate of the will, to the executor or executors named in such will, 
or letters of administration with or without the will annexed, as the case 
may require, to some person who by the provisions of the last preceding 
section is competent to apply for the same, or to some other person who, 
in the opinion of the court, by reason  of consanguinity, amount of interest, 
the safety of the estate, and probability that it will be properly 
administered, is a proper person to be appointed administrator and in 
every such case letters of administration may be limited or not in manner 
herein after provided, as the court thinks fit.  
When Public 
Trustee may 
be 
appointed.** 519. Where there is no person fit and proper in the opinion of the court to 
be appointed administrator in the manner provided, in the last preceding 
section or no such per son is willing to be so appointed, and not in any other 
case, the court shall appoint the Public Trustee as administrator.  
Security.  520. In every case in which it is found necessary, whether by reason of 
such executor as aforesaid not applying for probate, or by reason of there 
being no executor resident in Sri Lanka competent and willing to act, or by 
reason of no person who is compet ent under section 517 to apply for letters 
of administration, so applying, that any such person as is mentioned, in 
section 518 should be appointed administrator, the court shall take from 
such person security for the due administration of the estate, and shall for 
this purpose require such person to enter into a -Bond with two good and 
sufficient sureties in Form No. 90 in the First Schedule, for the due 
administration of the deceased person's property, and it shall not in any 
case be competent for the cou rt to dispense with such security.  
Application 
for 
administration 
by the Public 
Trustee.  521.  
 (1) Whenever the Public Trustee applies for letters of 
administration, it shall be sufficient if the petition presented for 
the grant of such letters states    (a) the time and place of the death of the deceased to 
the best of the knowledge and belief of the petitioner; 
 (b) the names and addresses of the heirs of the 
deceased, if known ;  
 (c) the full and true particulars of the property left by 
the deceased as far as he has been able to ascertain 
the same ;  
 (d) particulars of the liabilities of the estate, if 
known -  
 
 (2) The Public Trustee shall not be required to file accounts of 
the property of the deceased unless the court otherwise directs.  
 
Duties of 
Public 
Trustee in 
administering 
estates.  522. Whenever the Public Trustee has obtained probate in respect of a  will 
or grant of letters of administration in respect of the estate of a deceased 
person, he shall as far as practicable, comply with the provisions of this 
Chapter relating to the administration of estates:  
 Provided that the Public Trustee shall not be required  
 (a) to take oath as executor or administrator ;  
 (b) to furnish any bond or security, but shall be subject to the 
same liability and dues as if he had given such bond or security 
;  
 (c) to affix stamps on any document at or about the time of the 
making of such document; but shall eventually make such 
payment as required by the Stamp Duty Act, No. 43 of 1982 ;  
 (d) unless the court otherwise directs, to tender final accounts.  
 
To whom 
grant should 
be made.  523. In the case of a conflict of claims to have the will proved and probate 
or letters of administration granted, the claim of an executor or his attorney 
shall be preferred to that of all others, and the claim of a creditor  shall be 
postponed to the claim of a residuary legatee or devisee under the will. And 
in the like case of a conflict of claims for grant of. administration where 
there is intestacy, the claim of the widow or widower shall be preferred to 
all others and th e claim of an heir to that of a creditor:  
 Provided, however that the court may for good cause supersede the claim 
of the widow or widower.  
Mode of 
application 
for probate 
and proof of 
will.  524.  
 (1) Every application to the, District Court to hav e the will of a 
deceased person proved, shall be made within a period of three 
months from the date of finding of the will, and shall be made 
by way of petition and affidavit and such petition shall set out 
in numbered paragraphs  
 (a) the fact of the maki ng of the will;  
 (b) the details and the situation of the deceased's 
property;  
 (c) the grounds upon which the petitioner is entitled to 
have the will proved; and  
 (d) the , character in which the petitioner claims 
(whether as creditor, executor administrator, residuary legatee, legatee heir or devisee).  
 
 (2) If the will is not already deposited in the District Court in 
which the application is made, it must either be appended to the 
petition or must be brought into Court and identified by 
affidavit, with the will as an exhibit thereto,, or by parole 
testimony at the time the application is made.  
 (3) Every person making or intending to make an application to 
a Distr ict Court under this section to have the will of a deceased 
person proved, which will is deposited in another District Court, 
is entitled to procure the latter Court to transmit the said will to 
the Court to which application is to be made, for the purpose  of 
such application and such application must be supported by 
sufficient evidence either by way of affidavits of facts, with the 
will as an exhibit thereto, or the oral testimony, proving that the 
will was duly executed according to law and establishing t he 
character of the petitioner according to his claim.  
 (4) The petitioner shall tender with the petition  
 (a) proof of payment of charges to cover the cost of 
publication of the notice under section 529 ; and  
 (b) the  consent in writing of such respondents as 
consent to his application.  
 
 (5) If the petitioner has no reason to suppose that his application 
will be opposed by any person, he shall file with his petition an 
affidavit to that effect and may omit to name  any person in his 
petition as respondent.  
 
Duty to 
report where 
person dies 
leaving 
property 
exceeding 
five hundred 
thousand 
rupees in 
value.  525. When any person shall die in Sri Lanka without leaving a will, it shall 
be the duty of the widow, widower, or next of kin of such person, if such 
person shall have left property in Sri Lanka amounting to or exceeding in 
value five hundred thousand rup ees, within one month of the date of his 
death to report such death to the District court of the district in which he 
shall have so died, and at the same time to make oath or affirmation or 
produce an affidavit verifying the time and place of such death, a nd stating 
if such is the fact, that the intestate has left property within the jurisdiction 
of that or any other, and in that event what court, and the nature and value 
of such property.  
Who may 
apply for 
letters of 
administration. 526. When any perso n shall die without leaving a will or where the will 
cannot be found, and such person shall have left property in Sri Lanka  
 (a) any person interested in having the estate of the deceased 
administered may apply for the grant to himself of letters of 
admin istration; or  
 (b) any heir of the deceased may apply for the issue of 
certificates of heir -ship to each of the heirs entitled to succeed 
to the estate of the deceased.  
 
 Such application shall be made in accordance with section 528 to the 
District Court of the District within which the applicant resides, or within 
which the deceased resided at the time of his death, or within which any 
land belonging to the deceased's esta te is situate.  
Administration 527. In cage no person shall apply for the grant of letters of compulsory 
where estate is 
over five 
hundred 
thousand 
rupees in 
value.  administration or for the issue of certificates of heirship, as the case may 
be and it appears to the court necessary or convenient to appoint some 
person to administer the estate or any part thereof, it shall be lawful for 
the court in its discretion, and  in every such case where the estate 
amounts to, or exceeds in value, five hundred thousand rupees, the court 
shall in accordance with the procedure set out in this Chapter appoint 
some person, whether he would under ordinary circumstances be entitled 
to take out administration or other wise, to administer the estate, and the 
provisions of sections 518 to 521, both inclusive, shall apply, so far as the 
same can be made applicable, to any such appointment.  
Mode of 
application 
for letters of 
administration  
or certificates 
of heirship.  528.  
 (1) Every application to the District Court for grant of 
administration or for the issue of certificates of heirship shall 
be made within three months from the date of death, and shall 
be made by way of petition and af fidavit, and such petition 
shall set out in numbered paragraphs -  
 (a) the fact of the absence of the will;  
 (b) the death of the deceased ;  
 (c) the heirs of the deceased to the best of the 
petitioner's knowledge ;  
 (d) the details and the situation of the deceased's 
property;  
 (e) the particulars of the liabilities of the estate;  
 (f) the particulars of the creditors of the estate ;  
 (p) the character in which the petitioner claims and 
the facts which justify his doing so;  
 (h) the share of the estate which each heir is entitled 
to receive, if agreed to by the heirs.  
 
 (2) The application shall be supported by sufficient evidence to 
afford prima facie proof of the material averments in the 
petition, and shall name the next of kin of the deceased as 
respondents. If the petitioner has no reason to suppose that his 
applicat ion will be opposed - by any person, he shall file with 
his petition an affidavit to that effect.  
 (3) The petitioner shall tender with the petition  
 (a) proof of payment of charges to cover the cost of 
publication of the notice under section 529 ;  
 (b) the consent in writing of such respondents as 
consent to his application.  
  
Publication 
relating to 
application 
under 
section 524 
and 528.  529.  
 (1) Every application to a District Court under section 524 or 
528 shall be received by the Probate Officer of the District 
Court, and shall be registered in a separate register to be 
maintained for that purpose by the Probate Officer who shall 
thereafter cause the required publications to be made in terms of 
subsection (2).   (2) The Probate Officer of a District Court shall, on any day of 
the week commencing on the third Sunday of every month 
cause a Notice in Form No. 84 in the First Schedule to be 
published in a prescribed local news - paper in Sinhala, Tamil 
and English incorporating the information relating to  
 (i) every application under section 524 or 528 
received by that District Court in the Preceding one 
month ; and  
 (ii) every application under section 524 or 528 
received by that District Court and incorporated for 
the first time in the notice published in respect of such 
District Court in the previous month,  
 
 so however that the information in respect of every a pplication 
under section 524 or 528 received by every District Court is 
published on two separate occasions in two consecutive months. 
 (3) The notice published under subsection (2), shall call upon 
persons having objections to the making of an order declaring 
any will proved or the grant of probate or of letters of 
administration with or without the will annexed, or the issue of 
certifica tes of headship to any person to whom the notice 
relates, to submit their written objections, if any, supported by 
affidavit, before such date as is specified in the notice, being a 
date not ' earlier than sixty days and not later than sixty seven 
days fro m the date of the first publication referred to in 
subsection (2) -  
 (4) Copies of such objections if any, shall be forwarded by the 
person making the same to the person making the application 
under section 524 or 528 as the case maybe, and shall also be
served on the other parties named in such objections.  
 
Appointment 
of Guardian 
Or Manager. 530. If any of the heirs, legatees or beneficiaries named in such notice is a 
minor without a natural guardian, or person of unsound mind, without a 
guardian, steps shall be taken for the appointment of a guardian of 
manager, upon the making of an applicat ion to the District Judge, which 
application shall be heard in Chambers.  
Order on 
application 
made under 
sections 524 
and 528.  531.  
 (1) If no objections are received in relation to any application 
received under section 524 or 528 in response to a no tice 
published under section 529, on or before the date specified in 
such notice in respect of such application, the Court shall  
 (a) in the case of an application under section 524, if 
the Court is satisfied that the evidence adduced is " 
sufficient to a fford prima facie proof as to the due 
making of the will and the character of the petitioner, 
it shall make order declaring the will to be proved and 
if the applicant claims  
 (i) as the executor or one of the executors of the will, and asks that probate t hereof be 
granted to him, the order shall declare that he 
is executor, and shall direct the grant of 
probate to him accordingly, subject to the 
conditions hereinafter prescribed ; or  
 (ii) in any other character than that of 
executor, and asks that the administration of 
the deceased's property be granted to him, 
then the order shall include a grant to the 
applicant of a power to administer the 
deceased's property according to the will w ith 
a: copy of the will annexed ; or  
 
 (b) in the case of an application under section 528  
 (i) make order for the grant of letters of 
administration to the petitioner subject to the 
conditions hereinafter prescribed; or  
 (ii) make order for the issue of a certificate of 
heirship in Form No. 87A in the First 
Schedule, to each of the heirs mentioned in 
the application, stating also the share of the 
estate which each heir is entitled to receive, if 
agreed to by the heirs ;  
 
 (c) in the case of an application under section 528 for 
the issue heirship, certificates of make order for the 
grant of letters of administration, instead, to some 
person entitled to take out administration, subject to 
the conditions hereafter, prescri bed, if in the opinion 
of court it is necessary to appoint some person to 
administer the state.  
 
 (2) The certificates of heirship issued under subsection (1) (b) 
(ii) above shall be sufficient proof of the true heirs of the 
deceased referred to therein, and may be produced for the 
purpose of claiming any share in respect of any right, title or 
interes t, accruing upon intestacy. .  
 (3) For the purpose of making an order under subsection (1), the 
Probate Officer shall submit all papers relevant to the 
application in question, to the District Judge in Chambers on the 
day following the date specified in  the notice published under 
section 529, in respect of such application and the court shall 
forthwith make an appropriate order.  
 
Procedure 
where there 
are 
objections to 
applications 
under 
section 524 
or 528.  532.  
 (1) If any objections are received in relation to any application 
under section 524 or 528 in response to a notice published 
under section 529, on or before the date specified in such notice 
in respect of such application, the Court shall proceed to hear 
try and determine such application in accordance with, the 
procedure herein provided and may for such purpose name a 
day for final hearing, and disposal of such application and may, in addition, make such order as it may consider necessary under 
section 541  hereof.  
 (2) For the purpose of making an order under subsection (1), the 
Probate Officer shall submit all papers, relevant to the 
application in question, to the District Judge in Chambers on the 
day following the date specified in the notice publishe d under 
section 529.  
 
Effect of 
acting in 
pursuance of 
a certificate 
of heirship.  532A. Where upon the production of a certificate of heirship issued by a 
District Court, under section 531(1) (b) (ii), any money, movable property 
or certificate is handed over or transferred in pursuance of such certificate, 
by any Bank or institution to  any heir entitled to the same, such handing 
over or transfer shall be deemed to be in discharge of an obligation to the 
deceased in respect of whose estate the certificate of heirship is so issued.  
At final 
hearing court 
to frame 
issues.  533. If on th e day appointed under section 532 (1) for final hearing, or on 
the day to which it may have been duly adjourned the persons filing 
objections satisfies the court that there are grounds objecting for to the 
application, such as ought to be tried on viva voc e, evidence, then the court 
shall frame the issues which appear to arise between the parties, and shall 
direct them to be tried on a day to be appointed for the purpose under 
section 386.  
Orders that 
may be made 
on final 
hearing.  534  
 (1) If at "the final hearing, or on the determination of the issues 
thus framed it shall appear to the court  
 (a) that the prima facie proof of the material 
averments in the application have not been rebutted, 
the court shall forthwith make order for the grant of 
probate or letters of ad ministration with the will 
annexed or grant of administration only subject to the 
conditions hereinafter prescribed, or for the issue of 
certificates of heirship, as the case may be ; or  
 (b) that the prima facie proof of the material 
averments in the petition have been rebutted then the 
court shall dismiss the petition, and in the event of any 
person who has filed objections having at such 
hearing, or trial of issues, established his right to have 
probate or administrat ion of the deceased's estate 
granted to him instead of to the petitioner, then the 
court shall further make an order to that effect in his 
favour subject to the conditions hereinafter prescribed; 
or  
 (c) that any person listed in the petition as an heir  is 
not in fact an heir, or that any other person not listed 
in the petition as an heir has established his right to be 
recognized as an heir, then the court shall make an 
order accordingly ; or  
 (d) that, in the case of an application for the issue of 
certificates of heirship to the heirs of any deceased, 
that letters of administration ought to -be granted instead, for the administration of the estate of such 
deceased, then the court shall make ord er the grant of 
administration in accordance with the provisions of 
this Chapter, subject to the conditions hereinafter 
prescribed.  
 
 (2) The dismissal of any petition shall not be a bar to a renewal 
of the application by the petitioner as long as gran t either of 
pro-bate of the deceased's will, or of administration of his 
property, shall not have been made, either on the occasion of 
this application or subsequently thereto, to some person other 
than the petitioner.  
 
Procedure 
where 
corporation 
is appointed 
administrator 
or executor.  535  
 (1). Where a Corporation is appointed executor under a will 
either alone or jointly with another person, the court may grant 
probate to such Corporation either solely or jointly wit h such 
other person as. the case may require, and the Corporation may 
act as executor accordingly.  
 (2) Letters of administration may be granted to any Corporation 
either solely or jointly with another person and the Corporation 
may act as administrator accordingly.  
 (3) Any officer, authorized for the purpose by such Corporation, 
may swear affidavits, take the oath of office, give security, and 
do any other act or thing, which the court may require, on 
behalf of the Corporation and the acts of such officer shall be 
binding on the Corporation -  
 
Who may 
file Caveat.  536. At any time after the notice publish ed under section 529 and before 
the final hearing of the petition, it shall be competent to any person 
interested in the will or in the deceased person's propert y or estate, though 
not a person specified in the petition, to intervene, by filling in the same 
court a caveat as set out in Form 93 in the first Schedule against the 
allowing of the petitioner's claim or a notice of opposition thereto, and the 
Court may permit such person to file objections, if any, and may adjourn 
the final hearing of the petition.  
Power to 
recall revoke 
or cancel 
probate 
administration 
or certificate 
of heirship.  537. In any case where a certificate of heir ship has issued, or probate of a 
deceased person's will or administration a", a deceased person's property 
has been granted it shall be competent to the District Court to cancel the 
said certificate, or recall t he said probate or grant of administration, and to 
revoke the grant thereof, upon being satisfied that the certificate should 
not have been issued or that the will ought not to have been held proved, 
or that the grant of probate or of administration ought not to have been 
made; and it shall also be competent to the District Court to recall the 
probate or grant of administration, at any time upon being satisfied that 
events have occurred which render the administration hereunder 
impracticable or useless.  
Transitional 
for recall 
amp;c.  538. All applications for the cancellation, recall or revocation of 
certificates or heir - ship, probate or grant of administration shall be made 
by petition, in pursuance of the rules of summary procedure, and no such 
applic ation shall be entertained unless the petitioner shows in his petition 
that he has such an interest in the estate of the de - ceased person as entitles him in the opinion of the court to make such application.  
Inventory 
and 
valuation.  539.  
 (1) In every case where an order has been made, by a District 
Court declaring any person entitled to have probate of a 
deceased person's will, or administration of a deceased person's 
property granted to him it shall be the duty of the said person, 
executo r or administrator, in whose favour such order is made, 
to take within fifteen days of the making of such order, the oath 
of an executor or administrator as set out in Form No. 92 in the 
First Schedule, and thereafter to file in court within a period of 
one month from the date of taking of the oath, an inventory of 
the deceased person's property and effects, with a valuation of 
the same as set out in Form No. 92 in the First Schedule and the 
court shall forthwith grant probate or letters of administration, 
as the case may be.  
 (2) Upon the making of an order under section 531 (1) (b) (ii) 
declaring any person entitled to have issued to him a certificate 
of heirship, the court shall forthwith issue such certificate to 
such person.  
 
Limited 
probate or 
administration. 540. It is competent to the District Court to make a grant of probate or a 
grant of administration, limited, either in respect to its duration, or in 
respect to the property to be administered thereunder, or to the power of 
dealing with tha t Property which is conveyed by the grant, in the 
following cases: ,  
 (a) When the original will of the deceased person has been lost 
since the testator's death, but a copy has been preserved, 
probate of that copy may be granted, limited until the original 
be brought into court.  
 (b), In the like event, and with the like limitation, if no copy 
has been pre - served, probate of a draft will may ' be granted, 
or if in addition no draft is available, then probate of the 
contents or of the substance and effect of the will, so far as 
they can be established by evidence, may be g ranted.  
 (c) When the original will is in the hands of some person 
residing out of Sri Lanka, who cannot be compelled to give it 
up to the executor, and if the executor produces a copy, then 
probate of that copy may be granted, limited until the origina l 
be brought into Court, if, however, the will has been duly 
proved out of Sri Lanka, probate may be granted, to the 
executor on a proper exemplification of the foreign probate 
without any limitation in the grant.  
 (d) If the sole executor of a will doe s, or if there are more 
executors than one and all the executors reside, out of Sri 
Lanka, or such of the executors as reside in Sri Lanka decline 
to act, then the court may grant administration, with copy of 
the will annexed to any person within Sri Lanka , as attorney of 
the executor or of the executors, who shall be appointed for 
that purpose by power of attorney, the grant so made being limited for the use and benefit of the principal until the 
executor or one of the executors comes in and obtains probat e 
for himself. If the document admitted to proof in this case be a 
copy of, or substitute for the original on account of the 
original itself not being forthcoming by reason of, one of the 
just-mentioned causes, the grant shall further be limited until 
the original is brought into court: Provided also, that if the 
person applying for the grant is not the attorney of all the 
executors, where there are more than one, the grant of 
administration shall not be made to him until the remaining 
executors have declin ed to act.  
 (e) In the case of a will, and there being no executor within Sri 
Lanka willing to act, grant of administration with copy of the 
will annexed may be made to the attorney of an absent 
residuary legatee, or heir limited until the principal sha ll come 
in and obtain administration for himself; or in the like case, 
the grant may be made to the guardian of a minor residuary 
legatee, within Sri Lanka, limited during the minority, or to 
the manager of the estate of a residuary legatee who is of 
unsou nd mind, within Sri Lanka, limited during the 
unsoundness of mind.  
 (f) In the case of intestacy, grant of administration of the 
deceased person's property may be made, limited in like 
manner to the guardian of a minor heir or to the manager of 
the estate of an heir who is of unsound mind.  
 (g) The Court may grant proba te or administration limited to 
any particular property or for any particular purpose, in any 
case where it considers that a larger grant is unnecessary. In 
all the foregoing cases, the material and relevant facts 
necessary to justify the' court in making the limited grant must 
be set out in the petition of application, and must be 
established by prima facie evidence before the order is made.  
 
Administration 
pendente lite.  541.  
 (1) Where any legal proceeding touching the validity of the 
will of a deceased person or for obtaining, recalling or 
revoking grant of probate or letters of administration or for 
obtaining certificate of heirship is pending, the court may, 
either on the gr ound of undue delay or for any sufficient cause 
 (i) grant letters of administration to the estate of the 
deceased, to an administrator limited for the duration 
of such proceeding, such administrator shall be 
subject to the immediate control of the court and act 
under its direction and shall' not have the right of 
Distributing the estate; or  
 (ii) if it become necessary to sell any property of the 
estate of a deceased person prior to the grant of 
probate or letters of administration the court may 
grant letters limited for the purpose of selling such property in which event the property shall then be 
specified in the grant and such grant shall expressly 
state that the letters are issued subject to the 
following conditions:  
 (a) that the sale shall be if by private treaty, 
at the price fixed by court or if by public 
auction either at an upset price of 'otherwise  
 (b) that the net proceeds of the sale shall be 
deposited in court within such time as the 
court may prescribe;  
 (c) that the administrator to whom - the 
letters are issued is not empowered to 
execute any deed of conveyance of 
immovable property, prior to the 
confirmation of sale by the court; and  
 (d) any other stipulation the court may in the 
circumstances deem fit to impose.  
  
 (2) Before making an order for grant of letters under this 
section, the respondents to the original petition for probate or 
letters of administration, or certificates of heirship shall be 
given notice of the application and they or any other person 
interes ted in the estate shall be heard in opposition unless they 
or any of them shall have signified their assent to such sale.  
 
Power of 
administration 
when not 
limited.  542. If no limitation is expressed in the order making the grant, then the 
power of administration, which is authenticated by the grant of probate, or 
is conveyed by the grant of letters of administration, extends to every 
portion of the deceased person's property, movable and immovable, within 
Sri Lanka, other than such property as is deemed under section 554A not 
to be the property of the deceased, or so much thereof as is not 
administered, and endures for the life of the executor or administrator or 
until the whole of the said property is administered, according as the death 
of the executor or administrator, or the completion of the administration, 
first occurs.  
Issue of 
Letters ad 
Colligenda.  543. If any person shall die leaving property in Sri Lanka , the Judge of the 
court of any district in which such property shall be situate shall, on the 
facts being verified to his satisfaction and, it being made to appear that 
there is not some next of kin or other person in Sri Lanka, entitled to 
administration  of the estate of the person, so dying, issue letters ad 
colligenda in the - Form No. 91 in the First Schedule to one or more 
responsible persons to take charge of such property until the same shall be 
claimed by some executor or administrator lawfully ent itled to administer 
the same, or by any heir to whom a certificate of heir -ship shall have been 
issued.  
Nomination.  544.  
 (1) Any person over sixteen years of age who has  
 (a) moneys in any account, other than a current 
account in any licensed Commercial Bank within the meaning of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988;  
 (b) any share in a company as defined in the 
Companies Act, No. 17 of 1988;  
 (c) any life insurance policy issued by the Insurance 
Corporation of Sri Lanka, established by the Insurance 
Corporation Act, No. 2 of 1961 or by any Corporation 
incorporated under the Insurance (Special Provisions) 
Act, No. 22 of 1979, or by any company r egistered 
under the Control of Insurance Act, No. 25 of 1962, as 
being authorised to transact insurance business;  
 (d) any money in deposit in any finance company 
registered under the Finance Companies Act, No. 78 
of 1988;  
 (e) any other movable prop erty in any vault in any 
licensed commercial bank, within the meaning of the 
Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988, may nominate a person 
(hereinafter referred to as the " nominee "), to whom, 
such monies share or other movable property lying to 
the credit of, or in  the name of, such first -mentioned 
person, (hereinafter referred to as "nominator") or 
moneys payable under such insurance policy, shall be 
paid or transferred upon his death.  
 
 (2) A nomination made under subsection (1) shall have effect 
upon the death of the nominator notwithstanding anything in his 
last will to the contrary.  
 (3) Any nomination made under subsection (1) shall be deemed 
to be revoked by the death of the nomin ee in the lifetime of the 
nominator or by written notice "of revocation signed by the 
nominator in the presence of a witness (who shall attest the 
signature of the nominator) or by any subsequent nomination 
made by the nominator.  
 (4) No money, certific ates or other movable property shall be 
handed by the Bank or institution as the case maybe, to any 
nominee unless the nominee satisfies the Bank or 'institution as 
to his true identity.  
 (5) The handing over, or transferring of, any money, share 
certif icate or deposit certificate or other movable property to 
any nominee of a nominator who has died, shall be a complete 
discharge of the obligations of the Bank or institution, in respect 
of the money, or other movable property, lying to - the credit of, 
or in the name of, such nominator, or under such insurance 
policy.  
 
No action 
maintainable 
in certain 
cases.  545. No person shall  
 (a) maintain any action for the re - cover of any property; or  
 (b) effect any transfer of any property, movable or immovable, 
in Sri Lanka, "belonging to, or included in,  
 
 the estate or effects of any person dying testate or intestate in or out of Sri 
Lanka within twenty years prior to the institution of action or the effecting 
of the transfer, unless grant of probate has been issued in the case of a person dying testate or letters of administration or certificates of heirship 
have been issued, in the case of a person dying intestate and leaving an 
estate amounting to, or exceeding, five hundred thousand rupees in value.  
Probate 
when 
executor is 
appointed 
for a limited 
period.  546. When a person is appointed executor of a will for a particular purpose 
only of the will, and not" executor of the will generally, probate will be 
granted to him limited for that purpose only.  
Fresh grant, 
when 
allowed.  547. When a sole execu tor or a sol surviving executor to whom probate has 
been granted, or a sole administrator or a sole surviving administrator to 
whom a grant of administration has been made, die leaving a part of the 
deceased's property unadministered, then a fresh grant of  administration 
may be made in respect of the property left unadministered according to 
the rules hereinbefore prescribed for a first grant.  
Rectification 
of errors.  548. Errors in names and descriptions, or in setting forth the time and place 
of the d eceased's death or the purpose in a limited grant, may be rectified 
by the court, and probate, letters of administration or certificates of heirship 
so granted or issued may be altered and amended accordingly.  
Compensation 
of executors 
and 
administrator  549. Compensation shall be allowed to executors and administrators by 
way of commission as well on property not sold but retained by the heirs, 
as on property sold by such executors and administrators, at such r ate not 
exceeding three per centum, and on cash found in the estate and on 
property specially bequeathed, at such rate not exceeding one and a half 
per centum, as the court shall, after taking into consideration the 
circumstances of each particular case wi th reference to the trouble 
incurred by such executors or administrators, determine. In no case shall a 
larger sum than five thousand rupees be allowed to any executor or 
administrator as such compensation, un less it shall be made apparent to 
the court th at such unusual trouble has fallen upon him as to entitle him, 
in the opinion of the court, to receive further remuneration.  
Compensation 
of several 
executors.  550. Each executor of administrator shall be entitled to the full 
compensation allowed by la w to a sole executor or administrator, unless 
there are more than three, in which case the compensation to which three 
would be entitled shall be apportioned among them all according to the 
services rendered by them respectively, and a like apportionment s hall be 
made in all cases where there shall be more than one executor or 
administrator. But where the will provides a specific compensation for an 
executor or administrator, he shall not be entitled to any allowance other 
than that so provided, un less he files in court a written renunciation of the 
specific compensation.  
Filing of 
accounts.  551. Every executor and administrator shall file in the District Court, on or 
before the expiration of twelve months from the date upon which probate 
or grant of ad  ministration issued to him, or within such further time as the 
court may allow, a true and final account of his executorships or 
administration, as the case may be, verified on oath or affirmation, with all 
receipts and vouchers attached, and may at the s ame time pay into court 
any money which may have come to his hands in the course of his 
administration to" which any minor or minors may be entitled: Provided 
that where the parties consent, the filing of such account and payment shall be dispensed with on  payment of the stamp ' duty that would have been 
otherwise payable on the filing of such account, and the proceedings shall 
then be closed.  
Executor or 
administrator 
failing to 
administer 
within one 
year liable 
for interest.  552. If any executor or administrator shall fail to pay over to the creditors, 
heirs, leg alee or other persons the sums of money to which they are 
respectively entitled within one year after probate or administration is 
granted, such executor or administr ator shall be liable to pay interest out of 
his own funds for all sums which he shall retain in his own hands after that 
period, unless he can show good and sufficient cause for such detention.  
Offences.  553.  
 (1) Any person who willfully conceals the  existence of a will or 
knowingly fail to comply with the provisions of section 516 
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to a fine 
equivalent to the value of the estate dealt with in the will.  
 (2) Any person who willfully  
 (a) fails to disclose the existence of any heirs of the 
deceased; or  
 (b) makes a false statement regarding any heir of the 
deceased; or  
 (c) makes a false statement regarding the property, the 
creditors or debtors of the deceased ; or  
 (d) makes any other false statement relating to any 
matter which is required to be set out, in any 
.application made under section 524 or 528, shall be 
guilty of an offence and be liable to a fine equivalent 
to the value of the share or shares devolving on the 
heir or heirs who have not been disclosed or the value 
of the property with regard to which the false 
statement has been made, as the case may be.  
  
Transitional 
provisions.  554.  
 (1) Where a person has died without leaving a will in Sri Lanka 
prior to the date on which this Chapter comes into operation, 
and testamentary proceedings have not commenced in respect 
of the estate of such per - son, the provisions of this Chapter 
shall ap ply to the administration of such estate.  
 (2) Where an application has been made to any District Court 
prior to the date on which this Chapter comes into operation, for 
the issue of probate of a will or the grant of letters of 
administration in respect of an estate the value of which is over 
rupee s five hundred thousand, and an order nisi has not been 
made, such application shall be deemed to be an application 
made under section 524 or 528 as the case may be, and shall be 
heard and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this 
Chapter.  
 (3) Where an application has been made to any District Court 
prior to the date .on which this Chapter comes into operation, for the grant of letters of administration, in respect of an estate 
the value of which is less than rupees five hundred thousand, 
and an order nisi has not been made, such application shall be 
terminated on the coming into operation of this law:  
 Provided however, if it appears to court. that it is necessary or 
convenient to grant letters of administration or certificates of 
heirshi p as the case may be to any person interested in having 
the estate of such deceased person administered, or where any 
heir of such deceased person is interested in obtaining 
certificates of heirship in respect of such estate, the Court may 
in its discretio n, permit the continuation of such action.  
 
Interpretation. 554A.  
 (1) in  this Chapter, "Probate Officer" means the Registrar of 
the District Court and includes any other officer generally or 
specially authorized by the court to exercise the powers and 
perform the duties of a Probate Officer, in testamentary 
proceedings.  
 (2) For the purpose of proceedings under this Chapter "estate" 
and "property" of any deceased person shall be deemed not to 
include;  
 (a) any money or other movable property lying in any 
Bank to the credit of such deceased at the time of his 
death;  
 (b) the moneys represented by any share certificates 
and deposit certificates issued by any institution and 
remaining in the name of such deceased at the time of 
his death ; if he had made a nomination in respect 
there -of under subsection (1) of section 54 4; and  
 (c) the moneys payable under a contract of insurance 
entered into by the deceased and subsisting on the 
date of his death whether, any nomination in respect 
thereof had been made under subsection (1) of 
section 544, or not.'.  
   
Amendment of section 554Y 
of the principal enactment.**  5. Section 554Y of the principal enactment is hereby amended as follows:  
 (1) in paragraph (a) of that section by the substitution for the words 
and figures "required by section 538;", of the words and figure s 
"required by section 539;"; and  
 (2) in paragraph (b) of that section by the substitution for the words 
and figures " required , by section 553 ;", of the word and figures " 
required by section 551;".  
 
Amendment of section 
724 of the principal 
enactment.  6. Section 724A of the principal enactment is hereby amended in subsection (1) of 
that section by the substitution for the words and figures "prescribed by section 
553.", of the words and figures "presc ribed by section 551.".  
Amendment of the first 
Schedule to the principal 
enactment.  7. The First Schedule to the principal enactment is here - by amended by the 
omission there from of Form Nos. 81, 82, of the 83, 84, 84A, 84B, 85, 86, 87, 88, 
89, 90, 91 , 92 and 93 and the schedule Substitution therefor of the following new  Forms.  
Repeal of sections 18. 20, 26 to 
'41 of Act No. 79 of 1988.  8. The Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, No. 79 of 1988, is hereby 
amended by the repeal of sections 18, 20, 25 to 41 (both inclusive), of that Act. 
Sinhala text to prevail in the event of 
inconsistency.  9. In the event of any inconsistency between the Sinhala and Tamil texts 
of this Act, the Sinhala text shall prevail.  
 
 
    
 